when I think about it there's actually
three Eureka moments that have
determined where I'm going the first was
in my early history on the farm and I
was sitting around the big country porch
table at lunch waiting for my
grandfather to come in to say grace we
all would working in the field all
morning we were hot sweaty and hungry
but we were allowed to fill our plates
up before grandpa came in and as I was
sitting there idly staring at that plate
I realized that I had had a hand in
growing every single thing on it from
the fresh new tomatoes to the lettuce to
the beef and chicken and all the rest
that we had big foreign lunches and that
hit me like a ton of bricks I felt I
heard me screwed into the earth it was
if the ground had opened up underneath
me and I felt in free fall as if in an
elevator shaft and the cable had broken
and I was a ten-year-old just
overwhelmed by this recognition that I
had was a product of the planet in fact
had to work for my own means of
subsistence that's where I became a
human ecologist and it's actually the
beginning of my thinking about something
I've developed along the way with some
excellent graduate students the concept
of the human ecological footprint my
second Eureka moment
it came when or just after I had been
challenged by an economist to defend my
position that there were human limits to
growth and carrying capacity had given a
public talk in Vancouver on that subject
and this individual very prominent
resources economist took me aside and
said I've made a fool of myself because
what economists had long since abolished
the concept of limits now this was in
the mid 70s just after limits to growth
had come out and he introduced me to the
literature on trade and then
substitution of resources through
technological innovation and all that
sort of thing and I have to admit I
wasn't that familiar with it so I felt
like a bit of a fool and here was a very
cogent argument from his point of view
that humans had the capacity to liberate
themselves from nature's constraints and
I was a young wet-behind-the-ears PhD at
the time so I was a bit chastened but
whew maybe two or three years later ice
not a bed in the middle of the night
with my Eureka moment I guess this had
been churning away in the back of my
mind for all of that time it shows you
how dumb I am really but it occurred to
me that the economists argument was
valid if we took the standard ecologists
definition of carrying capacity the
number of organisms that can live in a
particular habitat without destroying
the means of their own substance of the
habitat if you're trading and if
technology is constantly evolving
then you liberate yourself from the
script constraints of that particular
place but if you turn the carrying
capacity ratio over instead of asking
how many people can be supported in this
area the question becomes how much area
is needed to support this number of
people wherever on earth that area is so
when we're trading for goods
we're actually trading carrying capacity
we're bringing in the productive
capacity of some other place to this
place and that enables this place to
greatly over exceed its own productive
potential we trade something else that
we may have an abundance or we trade our
intellectual assets but the point is
we're bringing in resources that are
produced in nature somewhere else so I
had my key to developing an index of
human impact based on the land area or
the ecosystem area embodied in those
trade flows and what I found with some
very early estimates is that contrary to
the economists argument that we were
decoupling or D materializing in fact
over even the few years that they did
this early work we could see the eco
footprint the human demand was actually
increasing my third Eureka moment came
when I got a new computer I had been
calling this estimate something like the
the regional capsule indicator or human
impact indicator and I got a new
computer a colleague came into my office
I happen to be working on the first
published paper of ecological footprint
and calling it something else and he
asked me how do you like your new
machine I said it's terrific it has a
much smaller footprint on my desk I've
gone from these big flat things to it
smaller cocktail remodel this is 1989 or
1990 and immediately as soon as I said
the word it has a smaller footprint I
realized I was writing about the human
ecological footprint so I threw that
paper I changed the whatever it was I
was calling it at the time to human
ecological footprint and it was that
metaphor that I think gave the idea the
power to move forward
so three Eureka moments one at ten years
old one you know 15 years later when I
was a young PhD and then a couple years
after that then well no it's a good 15
years later that I finally named